Barnaby Joyce has defended a decision to introduce tougher conditions on foreign investment in farming when he was the agriculture minister, after a new report found the policy changes "created long-term risks for the sector" and reduced the number of jobs in regional Australia.
Barnaby Joyce, who was minister at the time, has defended his work in the field
The former deputy prime minister also told the ABC that if his opponents had listened to him more closely on foreign relations, Australia's relationship with China might be improved.
"Maybe if they'd listened more closely to me then we wouldn't be walking into some of the problems we have with China," he said.
Mr Joyce made the remarks after the Productivity Commission found "higher barriers to foreign investment in agriculture increase investor costs and are likely to reduce economic activity, jobs and growth prospects in regional communities".
In its latest review of foreign investment, the commission said the Government's 2015 decision to tighten investment screening thresholds — from $252 million to $15 million for farms and $55 million for agribusiness — and introduce a register of foreign-owned land reflected the "public's strong opposition to foreign investment in agriculture" but was at odds with many farmers.
The commission found the 2015 policy changes "increased the restrictiveness of Australia's foreign investment in agriculture, creating long-term risks for the sector".
But Mr Joyce said the tougher conditions were "one of the better accomplishments" of his political career to date, saying he succeeded despite reservations of then-treasurer Joe Hockey and then-trade minister Andrew Robb.
"At the time I had debates with people such as Mr Hockey and Andrew Robb — they were sceptical of my position then," Mr Joyce said.
"People who ridiculed me for my position are extending the position I have now," he said.
"The argument was always put to me, 'but Barnaby they can't take it with them'; my argument was always 'they have no intention of taking it with them, they're going to control it from here'."
The report was also critical of the national interest test applied to foreign investment purchases, and found it was "very broad and lacks clarity around how it is interpreted".
It recommended greater transparency about how the national interest test is applied and made the broader point that more transparency could help reduce community concern about foreign purchases.
The report found that in June 2018, foreign interests covered 13.4 per cent of Australia's agricultural land, with a quarter of that apportioned to Australian co-owners.
"The largest foreign owners are the United Kingdom (2.6 per cent) and China (2.3 per cent)," the report said.
The report said in 2017-18 that the Foreign Investment Review Board (FIRB) screened and approved 201 applications for the agriculture, forestry and fishing industry worth $7.9 billion — less than 5 per cent of all the FIRB decisions by value.
"In 2017-18, the Government collected $114 million in fee revenue, while the operational costs of FIRB and its secretariats in the Treasury and the Australian Tax Office totalled only $14.7 million," it said.
