Undersecretary for Agricultural Policies Giuseppe L'Abbate said Italy's award winners were in his thoughts as he works on policies to help quality producers.
“My best com­pli­ments and wishes go to the win­ners of the pres­ti­gious NYIOOC World Olive Oil Com­pe­ti­tion,” the Ital­ian Agri­cul­tural Under­sec­re­tary Giuseppe L’Ab­bate wrote this week in a note to Olive Oil Times.
My thoughts go to them when I plan the actions to be car­ried out to enhance the Ital­ian qual­ity pro­duc­tions.
“They keep the Ital­ian flag high, and my thoughts go to them when I plan the actions to be car­ried out to enhance the Ital­ian qual­ity pro­duc­tions,” he wrote.
Even with such a strong show­ing on the world stage, the mar­ket forces are stacked against pro­duc­ers of excel­lence who have to com­pete with infe­rior prod­ucts, price wars and con­sumers who know lit­tle about the value of high-qual­ity extra vir­gin olive oils.
L’Ab­bate said to improve the prospects for Italy’s mas­ter pro­duc­ers he keeps his focus on three main actions: the ​“fur­ther seg­men­ta­tion of the mar­ket, clar­ity of the sanc­tion­ing frame­work and an ade­quate national sec­tor plan.”
“Tak­ing the exam­ple of the high-qual­ity schemes planned for fresh milk and cooked ham,” L’Ab­bate said, ​“we should repli­cate the expe­ri­ence and also cre­ate a high-qual­ity scheme for extra vir­gin olive oil, tak­ing into account stricter para­me­ters, in order to reward the efforts of our farm­ers in cre­at­ing excel­lent prod­ucts.”
To that end, what is needed is to strengthen and clear up the cur­rent leg­is­la­tion, he added.
“With the draft law on agri-food frauds we’re work­ing on, we intend to pro­vide a revised sanc­tion­ing frame­work for coun­ter­feit­ing in the olive oil sec­tor,” he explained.
Nonethe­less, the will­ing­ness to invest in qual­ity pro­duc­tions should be backed up by a national olive sec­tor plan. ​“Its estab­lish­ment and fund­ing can no longer be deferred,” the under­sec­re­tary wrote.
“Yet, in addi­tion to aim­ing at ris­ing vol­umes, we should con­tinue to encour­age qual­ity so that our coun­try can main­tain its promi­nent role, which was once again con­firmed by the suc­cess of the Ital­ian pro­duc­ers at the NYIOOC.”
