Farmers union points to ongoing challenges of debt, employment
Photo used for illustrative purpose. Syrian workers living in Jordan work on a tomato farm in Shouneh.
AMMAN — As the ongoing coronavirus pandemic takes its toll on many of the Kingdom’s sectors, the agricultural sector has gone against the grain, stating that it has had “one of the best seasons in years”.
“The coronavirus crisis has given us an incentive to push ourselves and work harder as we were one of the few sectors that were allowed to keep working under the lockdown,” said Mahmoud Rawabdeh, a member of the Jordanian Valley Farmers’ Association.
Ahmed Rawashdeh, a farmer who is also a member of the Jordanian Farmers’ Union, echoed Rawabdeh’s sentiments, saying that the past season was the “best season in more than nine years”.
He added that, with the exception of the “dragon storm” in March, which caused severe damage for a number of farmers, the season witnessed a “relief in economic conditions that enabled farmers to pay their debts”.
With imports put under greater scrutiny in the past few months, the focus on local produce has allowed farmers, traders and merchants to set “better prices” for their produce and benefit from increased demand for local products.
However, President of the Jordan Valley Farmers Union Adnan Khaddam said in a statement that, although the past season “witnessed a marked improvement in the level of demand and selling prices, the beneficiaries of this trend are not the entirety of the sector”.
“Optimism cannot be the leading theme for the coming season, given that many challenges in the sector persist, among which are the high cost of production, the accumulation of debt, the continued closure of the main export markets and the lack of adequate employment in the sector,” he said.
© Copyright The Jordan Times. All rights reserved. Provided by SyndiGate Media Inc. ( Syndigate.info ).
Disclaimer: The content of this article is syndicated or provided to this website from an external third party provider. We are not responsible for, and do not control, such external websites, entities, applications or media publishers. The body of the text is provided on an “as is” and “as available” basis and has not been edited in any way. Neither we nor our affiliates guarantee the accuracy of or endorse the views or opinions expressed in this article. Read our full disclaimer policy here .
