Construction continues on Spaulding Ranch. Photo courtesy  Boise Parks and Recreation
Boise Parks and Recreation is continuing construction on Spaulding Ranch in West Boise. The 20 acre park is located off Cole Road and Mountain View Drive by Capital High School.
Doug Holloway with Boise Parks and Recreation said the main purpose of the park will be: “agriculture; a true ‘farm to table’ experiential concept” and is unlike any park Boise has ever had.
“At the ranch, you will find local partners working together to showcase and engage with various elements of the community food system,” Holloway said.
Master plan rendering for Spaulding Ranch in Boise. Via GGLO
A small animal farm with the potential for housing chickens and grazing animals is also on the list.
When the city acquired the land, the site had a barn which will eventually serve as a community event and gathering space “much like the Boise Depot,” Holloway said.
The site also includes a house which according to the National Register of Historic Places, was built in the early 1900’s. It will eventually be converted into a cafe and store.
Spaulding Ranch is a multi-year project that does not have a set completion date and is dependent on funding.
This summer, crews will complete a relocated irrigation lateral, pump system and pond.
This fall, the city and Energize Our Neighborhoods will host a volunteer event to plant the first 100 trees in the orchard.
Next year, the city plans to build a park access road and parking lot that will run from North Glenwood Street to North Cole Road.
“In order to make the site accessible for future growers and urban agriculture partners, an irrigation system will also be constructed,” said Holloway.
According to the Boise Parks and Rec., there will be public feedback project opportunities throughout the construction process.
BoiseDev is the area's only locally-owned commercial news outlet. Your support will help us cover more stories and bring you more vital information.  Become a member today!
