Bitcoin price pulled back since last month at $10410 remaining below the $9500 mark.
The world of cryptos is waiting for a big bang this week as Bitcoin traders and investors brace for more than 100,000 BTC options valued at about $945 million set to expire on June 26, roughly about 70% of BTCs entire open interest.
These expiring BTC options could bring a tsunami of price volatility, as previous events of such magnitude had caused the market to “swing rapidly” at the size of the bitcoin open interest market expiring.
Data from Skew showed a detailed diagram of the distribution by a strike for this week’s BTC options expiry.
— skew (@skewdotcom) June 22, 2020
Bitcoin price pulled back since last month with $10410 remaining below the $9500 mark. BTC whales and professional traders keep buying in the dip, leading crypto experts to question whether BTC whales have something up their sleeves.
However, BTCs open interest doesn’t always predict the direction of market trend; it is certainly possible to gain more insight by studying additional fundamental analysis barometers such as the put/call ratio. Such a fundamental indicator gives a better picture of investors’ sentiment, as call options are often used for bullish strategy.
Data from Skew shows that open interest reached about $1.3 billion, a 100% surge over the last two months. Currently, Panama-based derivatives exchange Deribit accounts for 77% of the options market, although regulated venues such as CME and LedgerX are consistently gaining relevance.
Olumide Adesina a French-born Nigerian, an Investment Professional at Nairametrics Financial Advocates, owners of Nairametrics.com.
Olumide Adesina is a Certified Investment Trader, with more than a decade working expertise in Investment trading. 
A member of the Chartered Financial Analyst Society. You can follow Olumide on twitter @tokunboadesina or email via olumide.adesina@nairametrics.com.
Your email address will not be published.
As the rush for BTCs keeps increasing, the price will most definitely be affected.
Most BTCs wallets containing Bitcoin are already smiling to the bank, as a report seen on Glassnote Twitter’s feed shows that 83% of Bitcoin addresses are in a state of profit up 43% since the crash in March.
83% of #Bitcoin addresses are in a state of #profit – up 43% since the crash in March. @glassnode https://t.co/PaN6IId97D pic.twitter.com/dkDllqSv44
— Ciara Sun (@CiaraHuobi) June 23, 2020
Recall that the number of individuals with Bitcoin (BTC) assets of 0.1 coins or more has broken into new all-time highs recently.
Data obtained from a popular crypto data aggregator, Glassnode recently shows the number of Bitcoin wallets holding 0.1 bitcoins or more reaching a new record high of 3,054,282 beating out May 21’s previous record by about 212 addresses.
— Rafael Schultze-Kraft (@n3ocortex) June 13, 2020
How easy is tracking BTCs? It should be noted that Bitcoin is not really anonymous because all BTCs transactions are kept permanently and publicly on the blockchain or ledger system, so it’s very easy for anyone to see the transactions and balances of any BTC address.
Chainalysis researchers recently explained in detail that as the rush for BTCs keeps increasing, the price will most definitely be affected. The report said;
“With more people looking to trade BTCs, which is only becoming scarcer following the recent halving, bitcoin moving from the investment bucket into the trading bucket could become a crucial source of liquidity. However, one would expect this will only happen if bitcoin’s price rises to a level at which long-term investors are willing to sell,”
The report claims the “Hodler net position change,” which provides an aggregate of long-term wallet holder behaviour, has been positive on 154 of the first 170 days of 2020. Glassnode data shows Hodlers have made a net increase of 233,000 BTC to their positions since the start of the year.
