The bitcoin price is currently around half its $20,000 per bitcoin high but some think it could ... [+] return to that level later this year.
McGlone's analysis echos others who see bitcoin climbing this year, with a "fourth crypto cycle" potentially approaching.
"The 2017 cycle spawned dozens of exciting projects in a wide range of areas including payments, finance, games, infrastructure, and web apps," Andreessen Horowitz partners Chris Dixon and Eddy Lazzarin wrote in a blog post last month.
"Many of these projects are launching in the near future, possibly driving a fourth crypto cycle."
The bitcoin and crypto community was set alight last month by news legendary macro investor Paul Tudor Jones is buying bitcoin as a hedge against the inflation he sees coming as a result of unprecedented central bank money-printing, saying bitcoin reminds him of the role gold played in the 1970s.
Earlier this week, one of the most closely-watched bitcoin analysts, an anonymous strategist who claims to be a member of an institutional investment team that manages around $100 billion in assets, has released an update to his so-called stock-to-flow model, suggesting the bitcoin price could be about to surge to around $100,000 .
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
