The Ethereum network now has more bitcoin held in reserves than the Lightning Network, according to onchain statistics. At the time of publication, Wrapped Bitcoin (WBTC) has close to 4,000 BTC ($34.7M) held in reserves, while the Lightning Network has only 925 BTC ($8.3M).
Just recently a number of people on Twitter congratulated the Ethereum network for becoming Bitcoin’s ( BTC ) largest second layer or unofficial side-chain. This is because the Total Value Locked (TVL) for BTC-pegged ETH tokens has surpassed both Lightning Network and Blockstream’s Liquid platform combined. According to statistics on the web portal Defi Pulse, the Lightning Network (LN) has a TVL of around 925 BTC today . This means the LN reserves hold around 0.01% of all BTC in circulation. The TVL on the LN platform has held around $8 to $9 million since May 7, 2020. Prior to that, the LN had about a million dollars less than the current TVL on April 28, 2020.
Lightning Network stats on Tuesday, May 26, 2020.
The BTC-pegged ETH tokens called Wrapped Bitcoin (WBTC) have seen massive demand lately, and at the moment there is 3.9k BTC held in the WBTC reserves . Using today’s exchange rates there is around $34.7 million worth of BTC held and the demand spiked significantly during the last week and a half. For instance, on May 11, 2020, WBTC’s TVL only held $11 million worth of BTC . After that date, the TVL for the BTC-pegged ETH token jumped significantly and now captures 4X more than the LN platform.
Wrapped Bitcoin (WBTC) stats on Tuesday, May 26, 2020. Just recently, Vitalik Buterin discussed certain trust models for BTC-pegged ETH tokens and detailed that he was concerned about some of the trust models.
In addition to WBTC, the Ethereum network also has a number of other BTC-pegged ETH tokens and the protocol also has more tether (USDT) than the Omni Layer network . Besides tether, a great majority of the crypto economy’s stablecoins like TUSD, USDC, DAI, and PAX all leverage the ETH network as well. Despite, the massive interest in people using ETH for stablecoins and BTC-pegged ETH tokens using the ERC20 standard, Ethereum cofounder has some concerns. On Twitter, someone commented on how there is 2.5X more BTC on Ethereum than Blockstream’s Liquid project. In response, Ethereum cofounder Vitalik Buterin said :
I’m worried about the trust models of some of these tokens. It would be sad if there ends up being $5B of BTC on ethereum and the keys are held by a single institution.
Blockstream’s Liquid stats for May 2020. Blockstream’s Liquid trust model has been criticized often because of the 15 Federation members. The official Twitter account for the website Coinatmradar.com tweeted about the issues with Liquid two days ago. “On liquid network 1/3 of functionaries can block any funds,” Coinatmradar tweeted. “If a U.S. court order to stop a particular transfer and sends to 15 companies (of current 45 members) within U.S. jurisdiction, does that mean one person (judge) can theoretically block any funds movement on the Liquid network?”
Buterin did not disclose which project he was talking about, but many assume he may have been referring to WBTC. The project WBTC does have a custodian, and reserves are kept secure by the company Bitgo. The company offers a transparent web portal that allows people to verify custodied bitcoin addresses against the TVL within WBTC’s coffers. Besides the LN platform taking a fair share of criticism over the years, Blockstream’s Liquid has been criticized by the community as well. The founder of Blockchair, Nikita Zhavoronkov, recently took issue with Blockstream’s Liquid project on May 24 in a tweet.
“Ziya Sadr asks if an Iranian company may become a Liquid Functionary,” Zhavoronkov tweeted . “[Blockstream CEO Adam Back] tries to dodge the question. While the Terms of Service on their website gives a clear answer: NO.”
The discussion concerning Ethereum holding more BTC than the LN and Liquid combined, has been a trending conversation on social media and cryptocurrency forums. Lots of people debating on the custodial reserves held by Bitgo, but people also dislike the 15 company model that holds custodial powers within the Liquid federation. The community may still have to wait for Paul Sztorc’s drivechain, for a more decentralized BTC sidechain or second layer. Despite the custodial controversy, the Ethereum network, as far as Total Value Locked concerned is currently BTC ’s largest sidechain and the ETH chain moves an enormous amount of value every day.
What do you think about the TVL held on Ethereum? Let us know what you think in the comments below.
Spacex Bitcoin Scam Features BTC Giveaway, Elon Musk, and NASA Launch
A Spacex bitcoin scam has frequently appeared on Youtube, claiming to give away BTC. Its promo video features the recent Spacex launch with two NASA astronauts and an interview with Spacex and Tesla CEO Elon Musk. The scammers claim that ... read more.
The new top banking regulator for the Trump administration sees "huge and great promise" in cryptocurrency. Focusing on decentralized networks, bitcoin, and rewriting existing regulations, he shares his views on cryptocurrency and the creation of the digital dollar. Top US ... read more.
Wilshire Phoenix has filed to launch a publicly-traded trust called Bitcoin Commodity Trust (BCT) - putting the firm in direct competition with Grayscale Investments' $3.4 billion bitcoin trust (GBTC). According to the June 12 filing with the U.S. Securities and ... read more.
Following reports that Chinese authorities are freezing bank accounts of cryptocurrency traders, five banks have reportedly clarified their policies. They confirmed that accounts with legal crypto transactions will not be frozen. However, some people claim that their accounts have been ... read more.
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
A possible Satoshi Nakamoto, the mysterious creator of Bitcoin, has been sentenced to 25 years in prison. Criminal mastermind Paul Le Roux told the judge that upon his release he plans to "start a business selling and hosting bitcoin miners," ... read more.
The number of so-called whales with 1,000 bitcoin or more in their wallets has climbed to 1,882 from around 1,650 in January. It is the highest the numbers have reached in nearly three years. Whales may be defined as the ... read more.
During the last three months, the U.S. Federal Reserve has created a system of monetary avarice, as the central bank can literally do whatever it wants with zero oversight. The American public recently witnessed the Fed’s announcement on Monday, which ... read more.
There has been some confusion over whether India will ban cryptocurrency, including bitcoin, following recent reports of a note being circulated by the government. News.Bitcoin.com interviewed executives of five cryptocurrency exchange platforms in India to find out the truth about ... read more.
The chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) has called on other regulators to establish a framework for sound crypto regulation. He believes that the U.S. must lead in the crypto field and "applying overly prescriptive rules could stunt ... read more.
In his testimony before the Senate banking committee, Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell warned Congress that the U.S. federal budget has been on an unsustainable path for years. He added that the U.S. economy is facing a deep downturn with ... read more.
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has won a case in which it demanded that a Maryland couple liquidate their bitcoin to pay-off a $1.1 million tax debt. Alexander and Laura Strashny proposed to the IRS to pay their 2017 tax ... read more.
It’s been approximately 37 days since the notorious Bitcoin reward halving that took place on Monday, May 11, 2020. On June 16, the Bitcoin network saw a large upwards difficulty adjustment making it much harder to mine bitcoins and slowing ... read more.
Wisdomtree has filed for a commodity fund with 5% exposure to bitcoin, in a fresh attempt to bring an exchange-traded fund (ETF) backed by the benchmark cryptocurrency to the market. According to a filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange ... read more.
Former national security advisor John Bolton has reportedly revealed in his upcoming book an instruction about bitcoin that President Donald Trump gave to Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin. The U.S. Justice Department has filed a lawsuit against Bolton to stop the ... read more.
The popular and first Singapore-based carpooling platform, Ryde has revealed that customers will soon be able to pay with bitcoin. The feature will be available after the bitcoin support is incorporated into the company's payment app on June 22. Ryde ... read more.
Stephen Roach, former chief economist at Morgan Stanley, has predicted that a dollar crash is coming, forecasting a 35% drop in the dollar's value against other major currencies. He expects the U.S. national savings rate to sink deeper into negative ... read more.
Analysts Say Bitcoin Breakout Imminent: Silver-like Suppression, $5 Trillion in Cash Could Flow Into BTC
A number of venture capitalists and macro investors believe bitcoin's price will break out soon following suit with gold’s recent climactic rise. Dan Tapeiro, cofounder of Gold Bullion International, thinks that $4.6 trillion in cash sitting on the sidelines right ... read more.
Crypto Card Issuer Wirecard Missing $2.1 Billion Cash, Company Shares Plunge 62%
About 1.9 billion euros ($2.13 billion) worth of cash is missing from one of Wirecard's trust accounts and the crypto debit card provider cannot as yet account for the money, the company reported on Thursday. In a statement, the major ... read more.
The premier cryptocurrency gaming portal, Bitcoin Games has announced the launch of a Midsummer promotion that promises Free Spins and loads of entertainment. For well over, five years now Bitcoin Games has been the go-to destination for all your gaming ... read more.
Robust and effective compliance programs for virtual asset exchanges such as Bitcoin of America, which owns and operates a crypto exchange platform as well as a nationwide network of bitcoin ATM locations, isn’t simply a matter of operating a system ... read more.
Whale alert reports that a so-called whale has transferred the equivalent of $2.24 billion in bitcoin for less than $7. In a series of tweets on Friday, the crypto tracking tool said the bitcoin (BTC) whale sent a total of ... read more.
Bitcoin.com Exchange is thrilled to announce the upcoming listing of a new digital asset on the 20th of August 2020 at 10:00 UTC. BUY by Burency is a new cryptocurrency that aims to increase cryptocurrency and blockchain adoption in the ... read more.
Bitcoin's Rise Driven by Institutional Trading, Says Research and Investor Sentiment
The cryptocurrency bitcoin is trading at an all-time high relative to its social activity, explains the crypto research firm Tie. The analysts at Tie believe the ratio indicates that bitcoin is being driven by institutional trading. Meanwhile, statistics from Google ... read more.
Ernst & Young (EY) has introduced a new application that helps U.S. cryptocurrency traders calculate and file their taxes with ease. The EY Cryptoprep app, a Software as a Service (SaaS) web-based crypto tax engine, helps users calculate crypto-related gains ... read more.
Akon City, a "futuristic cryptocurrency themed city" founded by famous singer Akon, is ready to begin construction, with a plan to use the akoin cryptocurrency exclusively. Phase one of Akon City's construction will include roads, a hospital, a mall, hotels, ... read more.
Bitcoin Cash proponents have been introduced to a new project built using the Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) framework called mistcoin (MIST). The new token is essentially the first mineable implementation of colored coins on Bitcoin Cash. Mist allows participants to ... read more.
On June 19, 2020, the massive industrial firm Honeywell told the public the company is now running a quantum computer that effectively leverages six effective quantum bits, or qubits. Honeywell’s machine is two times more powerful than the quantum computers ... read more.
Wirecard chief executive officer quit as the crypto card payments firm revealed that the €1.9 billion ($2.1 billion) missing from its accounts may not exist. CEO Markus Braun resigned on June 19, after nearly 20 years at the helm. James ... read more.
Police in New Zealand confiscated NZ$140 million ($91 million) from Russian bitcoin exchange operator Alexander Vinnik. Vinnik is the alleged owner of the collapsed BTC-e exchange. The funds were seized from bank accounts held by Canton Business Corporation, a New ... read more.
Decrypted, a new crypto movie about Satoshi Nakamoto, the mysterious creator of Bitcoin, is in production. In this "outrageous and provocative dark comedy," Satoshi Nakamoto is kidnapped by the NSA and tortured for information that could help the government destroy ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Chairman Jay Clayton is geared to leave the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) after President Donald Trump nominates him to serve as the next U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York. With his departure, the cryptocurrency industry ... read more.
'Elon Musk' bitcoin giveaways continue to scam people on Youtube. Scammers have reportedly pulled in millions of dollars in bitcoin from people wanting to double their cryptocurrency. Some of them use bitcoin addresses containing the name Elon Musk, Spacex, or ... read more.
Only 3.5 Million Bitcoin Is Traded Worldwide; Majority of BTC Held Long-Term as Digital Gold
Only 3.5 million bitcoin or 19% of total circulating supply is actively traded throughout the world, while the rest is being held long-term by investors, according to a new report by crypto analytics company Chainalysis. Per the report, nearly 18.6 ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
Libertyx has expanded its network to include 20,000 7-Eleven, CVS, and Rite Aid Pharmacy stores where customers can buy bitcoin with cash. They can also buy bitcoin using debit cards at one of Libertyx's vast network of ATMs, bringing the ... read more.
Jim Rogers, who cofounded the Quantum Fund with billionaire investor George Soros, has shared his view on bitcoin, its use as money, and governments' response to the growing use of cryptocurrency. He predicts that central banks will not let uncontrolled ... read more.
This week digital currency enthusiasts have been discussing network fees, specifically transaction fees associated with the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains. Last Sunday on June 21, one Ethereum proponent noted that during the last 16 days, Ethereum users have paid more ... read more.
Simple Ledger Protocol Universe Is Thriving: Lottery, Mint, ATMs, Over 8,500 SLP Tokens Created
It’s been close to twelve months since we reported on the vast Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) universe built on top of the Bitcoin Cash chain. At the time, there were 2,700 unique SLP tokens created, and that’s increased by 217% ... read more.
