Ethereum closed the previous 4 hours down 0.37% ($0.9); this denotes the 2nd candle in a row it has gone down. Relative to other instruments in the Top Cryptos asset class, Ethereum ranked 3rd since the previous 4 hours in terms of percentage price change.
The back and forth price flow continues for Ethereum, which started today off at 243.16 US dollars, down 0.06% ($0.14) from the day prior. This move happened on lower volume, as yesterday’s volume was down 50% from the day before — and down 5.42% from the same day the week before. Ethereum outperformed all 5 assets in the Top Cryptos asset class since the day prior. Congrats to its holders! Let’s take a look at the daily price chart of Ethereum.
Notably, the current price of Ethereum is sitting close to its 20 day moving averages; moving average crosses often indicate a change in momentum, so this may be worth keeping an eye on. The clearest trend exists on the 90 day timeframe, which shows price moving up over that time. For another vantage point, consider that Ethereum’s price has gone down 7 of the previous 10 trading days. And for candlestick traders, a special treat: there is a pin bar pattern showing up on the charts as well. Rejoice!
For those of you who missed out on Bitcoin and Ethereum in the very early days. A third coin is being proclaimed as the third layer of the industrial blockchain revolution. It’s called Chainlink $link — I tweet this because I want you all to make it. Let’s go lads 🚀💷
The people making to the argument that “ETH won’t sharply go up in value because we won’t have ICO mania again” are trapped in the past.They’re heavily discounting everything new happening on Ethereum since then, and how those factors may affect demand for ETH in a new cycle.
2018 through 2019 was a difficult time for those who understood the potential of Ethereum & everything being built on it.But it won’t be nearly as difficult as 2020 to 2022 for those who *still* don’t understand (or are in denial about) the massive potential of Ethereum.
As for a news story related to Ethereum getting some buzz:
Over the past few months, the eth2 deposit contract was re-written in Solidity by Alex Beregszaszi, reviewed by a small group of Solidity experts, and formally verified by Runtime Verification largely reusing the K-spec originally written for the Vyper version of the contract….Although the previous Vyper contract was heavily tested, reviewed, and formally verified there are latent concerns about the safety of the Vyper compiler as it stands today….To avoid any shred of doubt in the safety of this critical contract, we recommend using the new Solidity contract for eth2 mainnet, and we welcome Solidity contract and EVM bytecode experts to review the contract and associated formal verification….Ever since the release of spec version v0.12, client teams have been hard at work updating and testing their codebases in preparation for public testnets.
