Ethereum is a cryptocurrency designed for decentralized applications and deployment of smart contracts.
According to reports recently released by Glasscode, the number of Ethereum addresses (EOAs) holding at least 0.1 ETH just crossed the 3 million mark for the first time. It has grown by 10.9% since the beginning of the year.
The number of #Ethereum addresses (EOAs) holding at least 0.1 $ETH just crossed the 3 million mark for the first time.
It has grown by 10.9% since the beginning of the year.
READ ALSO: NSE promotes Digitisation of Governance, Risk Management &amp; Compliance with launch of SentryGRC
“The increase in gas usage indicates a continuous growth in the use of Ethereum’s platform, as measured by the number of transactions, as well as demand for block space, as measured via gas per transaction,” said Wilson Withiam, research analyst at data provider Messari.
Gas is the token that energizes the Ethereum’s blockchain. It is the standard used to calculate the amount of charges an individual needs to pay in order to make transactions on Ethereum’s blockchain.
In addition, data from Coinmarketcap, shows Ethereum, is the second-most valuable cryptocurrency by market capitalization, with a value of $26 billion and a daily trading volume that stood at about $ 7.3 billion, at the time of drafting this report.
Like with many other crypto assets, speculating with Ethereum can be highly profitable and has had a good history of giving its investors huge returns. However, there are also many other options to make income from Ethereum. These options include Ethereum mining, Ethereum faucets and Ethereum staking.
Ethereum is a cryptocurrency designed for decentralized applications and deployment of smart contracts, which are created and operated without any fraud, interruption, control or interference from a third party.
Ethereum is a decentralized system, fully independent, and is not under anybody’s authority. It has no pivotal point, and its platform is connected to thousands of its users through their computing system around the world, which means it’s almost impossible for Ethereum to go offline.
Olumide Adesina a French-born Nigerian, an Investment Professional at Nairametrics Financial Advocates, owners of Nairametrics.com.
Olumide Adesina is a Certified Investment Trader, with more than a decade working expertise in Investment trading. 
A member of the Chartered Financial Analyst Society. You can follow Olumide on twitter @tokunboadesina or email via olumide.adesina@nairametrics.com.
