The bitcoin price exploded in 2017, partly due to expectations institutional investors were gearing ... [+] up to enter the space.
Earlier this year, San Diego-based Silvergate Bank, which boasts $2.3 billion in total assets, began allowing its customers to apply for loans collateralized by bitcoin held at digital currency exchanges that are also Silvergate customers.
Silvergate added 46 bitcoin and crypto customers during the first quarter of 2020 but could soon see competition in the space accelerate, with Wall Street giants such as JPMorgan beginning to take on crypto clients.
"As the big banks begin to figure it out and enter the digital currency ecosystem, it provides a huge validation of the asset class as a whole which in turn should drive more allocations to the asset class from main street asset managers, pensions and endowments," Lane said.
Meanwhile, Anchorage is expecting to grow its client base beyond custodial investors, with bitcoin and crypto miners and exchanges beginning to take an interest in its services, according to McCauley—though he warns crypto finance still has a long way to go.
"I don't think anyone in crypto has earnt the right to call themselves a prime broker just yet," McCauley added. "But we will get there eventually."
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
