Grayscale Investments has purchased more than 1.5 times the number of bitcoins mined since the third Bitcoin halving for its bitcoin trust. This indicates that there is a strong institutional demand for the cryptocurrency, which is expected to grow significantly post the coronavirus crisis.
Grayscale Bitcoin Trust (GBTC) has been racking up the number of BTC it has purchased since the third Bitcoin halving. Between May 12 and May 18, the week following the halving, Grayscale Bitcoin Trust acquired 12,021.15320371 bitcoins representing $112,336,936, according to Grayscale Investments’ filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
The following week, from May 19 to May 26, the trust aggregated 6,889.32628892 bitcoins representing $65,231,657. During the two-week period, Grayscale Investments bought a total of 18,910.47949263 bitcoins. Analyst Kevin Rooke tweeted on Wednesday:
Grayscale’s Bitcoin Trust bought 18,910 bitcoins since the halving. Only 12,337 bitcoins have been mined since the halving.
This means Grayscale Bitcoin Trust added more than 1.5 times the number of bitcoins mined during the two-week period after the third Bitcoin halving. This represents a major increase in its buying. For the 100-day period ending May 17, news.Bitcoin.com previously reported that Grayscale Investments purchased 33% of all bitcoin mined.
“Grayscale’s Bitcoin Trust is on a whole new level in 2020 … Institutional money has arrived,” Rooke asserted last week. In response to his analysis showing GBTC’s average weekly investment of $29.9 million in Q1 2020, a substantial increase from the $3.2 million in the first quarter of last year, Grayscale CEO Barry Silbert hinted on Twitter: “just wait until you see Q2.”
All Grayscale Investments’ cryptocurrency products as of May 28: Bitcoin Trust, Bitcoin Cash Trust, Ethereum Trust, Ethereum Classic Trust, Horizen Trust, Litecoin Trust, Stellar Lumens Trust, XRP Trust, Zcash Trust, and the Digital Large Cap Fund.
As of May 28, Grayscale Investments’ total assets under management (AUM) is $3.7 billion, spread over 10 cryptocurrency investment products. Among them, Grayscale Bitcoin Trust has the largest AUM of $3,302.2 million, followed by Grayscale Ethereum Trust with an AUM of $292.6 million. Grayscale previously revealed that 88% of all capital inflows in the first quarter were from institutional investors, dominated by hedge funds. Both the Bitcoin Trust and the Ethereum Trust saw record capital inflows.
Analysts have predicted rising institutional demand for cryptocurrency after the global economy recovers from the coronavirus pandemic and economic crisis. Several billionaire investors have also recommended investing in bitcoin as they expand their portfolios’ exposure to the cryptocurrency. With the sheer amount of bitcoin Grayscale has been purchasing, Rooke noted:
Wall Street wants bitcoin, and they don’t care what Goldman Sachs has to say.
His tweet followed Goldman Sachs’ client call about bitcoin , during which the firm highlighted its negative outlook towards the cryptocurrency. Goldman Sachs told its clients that cryptocurrencies “are not an asset class,” ignoring a ruling by the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) which found cryptocurrencies to be a commodity. Meanwhile, another major investment bank, JPMorgan Chase, is warming up to bitcoin and has reportedly begun providing banking services to crypto clients.
What do you think about the amount of BTC Grayscale Bitcoin Trust is buying? Let us know in the comments section below.
Purchase Bitcoin without visiting a cryptocurrency exchange. Buy BTC and BCH here .
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not a direct offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation or endorsement of any products, services, or companies. Bitcoin.com does not provide investment, tax, legal, or accounting advice. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
Spacex Bitcoin Scam Features BTC Giveaway, Elon Musk, and NASA Launch
A Spacex bitcoin scam has frequently appeared on Youtube, claiming to give away BTC. Its promo video features the recent Spacex launch with two NASA astronauts and an interview with Spacex and Tesla CEO Elon Musk. The scammers claim that ... read more.
The new top banking regulator for the Trump administration sees "huge and great promise" in cryptocurrency. Focusing on decentralized networks, bitcoin, and rewriting existing regulations, he shares his views on cryptocurrency and the creation of the digital dollar. Top US ... read more.
Wilshire Phoenix has filed to launch a publicly-traded trust called Bitcoin Commodity Trust (BCT) - putting the firm in direct competition with Grayscale Investments' $3.4 billion bitcoin trust (GBTC). According to the June 12 filing with the U.S. Securities and ... read more.
Following reports that Chinese authorities are freezing bank accounts of cryptocurrency traders, five banks have reportedly clarified their policies. They confirmed that accounts with legal crypto transactions will not be frozen. However, some people claim that their accounts have been ... read more.
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
A possible Satoshi Nakamoto, the mysterious creator of Bitcoin, has been sentenced to 25 years in prison. Criminal mastermind Paul Le Roux told the judge that upon his release he plans to "start a business selling and hosting bitcoin miners," ... read more.
The number of so-called whales with 1,000 bitcoin or more in their wallets has climbed to 1,882 from around 1,650 in January. It is the highest the numbers have reached in nearly three years. Whales may be defined as the ... read more.
During the last three months, the U.S. Federal Reserve has created a system of monetary avarice, as the central bank can literally do whatever it wants with zero oversight. The American public recently witnessed the Fed’s announcement on Monday, which ... read more.
There has been some confusion over whether India will ban cryptocurrency, including bitcoin, following recent reports of a note being circulated by the government. News.Bitcoin.com interviewed executives of five cryptocurrency exchange platforms in India to find out the truth about ... read more.
The chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) has called on other regulators to establish a framework for sound crypto regulation. He believes that the U.S. must lead in the crypto field and "applying overly prescriptive rules could stunt ... read more.
In his testimony before the Senate banking committee, Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell warned Congress that the U.S. federal budget has been on an unsustainable path for years. He added that the U.S. economy is facing a deep downturn with ... read more.
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has won a case in which it demanded that a Maryland couple liquidate their bitcoin to pay-off a $1.1 million tax debt. Alexander and Laura Strashny proposed to the IRS to pay their 2017 tax ... read more.
It’s been approximately 37 days since the notorious Bitcoin reward halving that took place on Monday, May 11, 2020. On June 16, the Bitcoin network saw a large upwards difficulty adjustment making it much harder to mine bitcoins and slowing ... read more.
Wisdomtree has filed for a commodity fund with 5% exposure to bitcoin, in a fresh attempt to bring an exchange-traded fund (ETF) backed by the benchmark cryptocurrency to the market. According to a filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange ... read more.
Former national security advisor John Bolton has reportedly revealed in his upcoming book an instruction about bitcoin that President Donald Trump gave to Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin. The U.S. Justice Department has filed a lawsuit against Bolton to stop the ... read more.
The popular and first Singapore-based carpooling platform, Ryde has revealed that customers will soon be able to pay with bitcoin. The feature will be available after the bitcoin support is incorporated into the company's payment app on June 22. Ryde ... read more.
Stephen Roach, former chief economist at Morgan Stanley, has predicted that a dollar crash is coming, forecasting a 35% drop in the dollar's value against other major currencies. He expects the U.S. national savings rate to sink deeper into negative ... read more.
Analysts Say Bitcoin Breakout Imminent: Silver-like Suppression, $5 Trillion in Cash Could Flow Into BTC
A number of venture capitalists and macro investors believe bitcoin's price will break out soon following suit with gold’s recent climactic rise. Dan Tapeiro, cofounder of Gold Bullion International, thinks that $4.6 trillion in cash sitting on the sidelines right ... read more.
Crypto Card Issuer Wirecard Missing $2.1 Billion Cash, Company Shares Plunge 62%
About 1.9 billion euros ($2.13 billion) worth of cash is missing from one of Wirecard's trust accounts and the crypto debit card provider cannot as yet account for the money, the company reported on Thursday. In a statement, the major ... read more.
The premier cryptocurrency gaming portal, Bitcoin Games has announced the launch of a Midsummer promotion that promises Free Spins and loads of entertainment. For well over, five years now Bitcoin Games has been the go-to destination for all your gaming ... read more.
Robust and effective compliance programs for virtual asset exchanges such as Bitcoin of America, which owns and operates a crypto exchange platform as well as a nationwide network of bitcoin ATM locations, isn’t simply a matter of operating a system ... read more.
Whale alert reports that a so-called whale has transferred the equivalent of $2.24 billion in bitcoin for less than $7. In a series of tweets on Friday, the crypto tracking tool said the bitcoin (BTC) whale sent a total of ... read more.
Bitcoin.com Exchange is thrilled to announce the upcoming listing of a new digital asset on the 20th of August 2020 at 10:00 UTC. BUY by Burency is a new cryptocurrency that aims to increase cryptocurrency and blockchain adoption in the ... read more.
Bitcoin's Rise Driven by Institutional Trading, Says Research and Investor Sentiment
The cryptocurrency bitcoin is trading at an all-time high relative to its social activity, explains the crypto research firm Tie. The analysts at Tie believe the ratio indicates that bitcoin is being driven by institutional trading. Meanwhile, statistics from Google ... read more.
Ernst & Young (EY) has introduced a new application that helps U.S. cryptocurrency traders calculate and file their taxes with ease. The EY Cryptoprep app, a Software as a Service (SaaS) web-based crypto tax engine, helps users calculate crypto-related gains ... read more.
Akon City, a "futuristic cryptocurrency themed city" founded by famous singer Akon, is ready to begin construction, with a plan to use the akoin cryptocurrency exclusively. Phase one of Akon City's construction will include roads, a hospital, a mall, hotels, ... read more.
Bitcoin Cash proponents have been introduced to a new project built using the Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) framework called mistcoin (MIST). The new token is essentially the first mineable implementation of colored coins on Bitcoin Cash. Mist allows participants to ... read more.
On June 19, 2020, the massive industrial firm Honeywell told the public the company is now running a quantum computer that effectively leverages six effective quantum bits, or qubits. Honeywell’s machine is two times more powerful than the quantum computers ... read more.
Wirecard chief executive officer quit as the crypto card payments firm revealed that the €1.9 billion ($2.1 billion) missing from its accounts may not exist. CEO Markus Braun resigned on June 19, after nearly 20 years at the helm. James ... read more.
Police in New Zealand confiscated NZ$140 million ($91 million) from Russian bitcoin exchange operator Alexander Vinnik. Vinnik is the alleged owner of the collapsed BTC-e exchange. The funds were seized from bank accounts held by Canton Business Corporation, a New ... read more.
Decrypted, a new crypto movie about Satoshi Nakamoto, the mysterious creator of Bitcoin, is in production. In this "outrageous and provocative dark comedy," Satoshi Nakamoto is kidnapped by the NSA and tortured for information that could help the government destroy ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Chairman Jay Clayton is geared to leave the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) after President Donald Trump nominates him to serve as the next U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York. With his departure, the cryptocurrency industry ... read more.
'Elon Musk' bitcoin giveaways continue to scam people on Youtube. Scammers have reportedly pulled in millions of dollars in bitcoin from people wanting to double their cryptocurrency. Some of them use bitcoin addresses containing the name Elon Musk, Spacex, or ... read more.
Only 3.5 Million Bitcoin Is Traded Worldwide; Majority of BTC Held Long-Term as Digital Gold
Only 3.5 million bitcoin or 19% of total circulating supply is actively traded throughout the world, while the rest is being held long-term by investors, according to a new report by crypto analytics company Chainalysis. Per the report, nearly 18.6 ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
Libertyx has expanded its network to include 20,000 7-Eleven, CVS, and Rite Aid Pharmacy stores where customers can buy bitcoin with cash. They can also buy bitcoin using debit cards at one of Libertyx's vast network of ATMs, bringing the ... read more.
Jim Rogers, who cofounded the Quantum Fund with billionaire investor George Soros, has shared his view on bitcoin, its use as money, and governments' response to the growing use of cryptocurrency. He predicts that central banks will not let uncontrolled ... read more.
This week digital currency enthusiasts have been discussing network fees, specifically transaction fees associated with the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains. Last Sunday on June 21, one Ethereum proponent noted that during the last 16 days, Ethereum users have paid more ... read more.
Simple Ledger Protocol Universe Is Thriving: Lottery, Mint, ATMs, Over 8,500 SLP Tokens Created
It’s been close to twelve months since we reported on the vast Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) universe built on top of the Bitcoin Cash chain. At the time, there were 2,700 unique SLP tokens created, and that’s increased by 217% ... read more.
