JPMorgan analysts found the bitcoin price has rarely dipped below bitcoin's cost of production.
Elsewhere, the report found "there is little evidence of run dynamics, or even material quality tiering among cryptocurrencies, even during the throws of the crisis in March," suggesting bitcoin weathered its "first stress test" well.
JPMorgan also said it expects bitcoin to remain mostly a speculative asset.
"[Bitcoin] price action points to their continued use more as a vehicle for speculation than medium of exchange or store of value," according to the JPMorgan report, titled Cryptocurrency takes its first stress test: Digital gold, pyrite, or something in between?
The bitcoin and cryptocurrency community has been caught off guard by JPMorgan's apparent 180 degree reversal on bitcoin and cryptocurrencies.
Earlier this month, JPMorgan signed established U.S. bitcoin and cryptocurrency exchanges Coinbase and Gemini as customers after a lengthy vetting period and it's emerged JPMorgan CEO Jamie Dimon has been hosting secret meetings with Coinbase chief executive Brian Armstrong since 2018.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
