Trust in bitcoin has surged over the last three years while faith in big banks, such as JPMorgan, ... [+] Goldman Sachs, and Wells Fargo, has plummetted.
The research chimes with reports from the bitcoin and cryptocurrency community that coronavirus and its ramifications has boosted interest in bitcoin.
"The surging activity we've seen since the beginning of 2020 has been in part inspired by the Federal Reserve's unprecedented monetary intervention," Alex Leishman, the founder of River Financial, a San Francisco-based startup bitcoin brokerage and financial services firm that has seen its client base double every month this year, said last week .
Growing interest in bitcoin from "seasoned macro investors" like Paul Tudor Jones, Dan Tapiero and Raoul Pal is legitimizing bitcoin "within the mainstream finance community ," according to Leishman.
"The evolution of finance is only happening faster in the wake of the current global economic crisis, which has illuminated holes within traditional financial systems that can potentially be filled by bitcoin," said Olaf Carlson-Wee, founder of hedge fund Polychain Capital, who recently led a River funding round.
The Tokenist surveyed around 5,000 people through April 2020, comparing the findings to surveys carried out by brokerage eToro, investor Blockchain Capital, and personal finance website BankRate in 2017.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
