The United Nations Children’s Fund (Unicef) has announced its largest cryptocurrency investment funding of startups. Eight companies in seven countries will use Unicef’s crypto fund to develop prototypes, pilot, or scale their technologies. Several of them are working on mitigating the hardships resulting from the covid-19 pandemic.
Unicef Cryptocurrency Fund announced on Friday its largest investment of startups in developing and emerging economies. Companies receiving crypto funding include those that will use their technologies towards mitigating the hardships of covid-19. Unicef is a U.N. agency responsible for providing humanitarian and developmental aid to children worldwide. The announcement reads:
Eight technology companies in developing and emerging economies will receive investment from the Unicef Cryptocurrency Fund (Cryptofund) to solve local and global challenges.
The Unicef crypto fund will invest 125 ETH in the eight companies from seven countries “to develop prototypes, pilot, or scale their technologies over six months,” the announcement details. “All investees have previously received up to $100,000 from Unicef’s Innovation Fund and are now receiving cryptocurrency to continue the development of their open-source and digital public goods.”
Unicef is funding eight startups in seven countries with cryptocurrency to solve local and global challenges. Companies receiving cryptocurrency funding from Unicef will use their technologies towards mitigating the hardships resulting from the effects of the covid-19 pandemic.
“We are seeing the digital world come at us more quickly than we could have imagined – and Unicef must be able to use all of the tools of this new world to help children today and tomorrow,” says Chris Fabian of Unicef Ventures. “The transfer of these funds – to eight companies in seven countries around the world – took less than 20 minutes and cost us less than $20. Almost instant global movement of value, fees of less than 0.00009% of the total amount transferred, and real-time transparency for our donors and supporters are the types of tools we are excited about.”
Among the eight companies receiving crypto from the Unicef Cryptocurrency Fund, three are grantees that received the fund’s first cryptocurrency investment last year. The rest were chosen from almost 40 startups that have graduated from the Unicef Innovation Fund. These companies “have undergone technical evaluations, quality assessments of their open-source tech solutions, evidence of impact and more,” Unicef described.
Two of the recipients of Unicef’s crypto are Indian companies: Avyantra and Statwig. Other recipients are Afinidata (Guatemala), Cireha (Argentina), Ideasis (Turkey), OS City (Mexico), Somleng (Cambodia), and Utopic (Chile).
Besides funding, these companies will “receive business growth mentorship, product, and technical assistance, open-source and UX and UI development, access to experts and partners, as well as opportunities to showcase their solutions,” the Unicef announcement further notes.
Unicef launched its cryptocurrency fund in October 2019 and became the first U.N. organization to hold and make transactions in cryptocurrency. The crypto fund makes disbursements denominated in bitcoin and ether to finance early stage, open-source technology benefiting children and young people. In addition, the Unicef Innovation Fund and Cryptofund currently have an open call for blockchain solutions to apply for funding of up to $100,000 and cryptocurrency combined.
What do you think about Unicef funding startups with cryptocurrency? Let us know in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not a direct offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation or endorsement of any products, services, or companies. Bitcoin.com does not provide investment, tax, legal, or accounting advice. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
Spacex Bitcoin Scam Features BTC Giveaway, Elon Musk, and NASA Launch
A Spacex bitcoin scam has frequently appeared on Youtube, claiming to give away BTC. Its promo video features the recent Spacex launch with two NASA astronauts and an interview with Spacex and Tesla CEO Elon Musk. The scammers claim that ... read more.
The new top banking regulator for the Trump administration sees "huge and great promise" in cryptocurrency. Focusing on decentralized networks, bitcoin, and rewriting existing regulations, he shares his views on cryptocurrency and the creation of the digital dollar. Top US ... read more.
Wilshire Phoenix has filed to launch a publicly-traded trust called Bitcoin Commodity Trust (BCT) - putting the firm in direct competition with Grayscale Investments' $3.4 billion bitcoin trust (GBTC). According to the June 12 filing with the U.S. Securities and ... read more.
Following reports that Chinese authorities are freezing bank accounts of cryptocurrency traders, five banks have reportedly clarified their policies. They confirmed that accounts with legal crypto transactions will not be frozen. However, some people claim that their accounts have been ... read more.
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
A possible Satoshi Nakamoto, the mysterious creator of Bitcoin, has been sentenced to 25 years in prison. Criminal mastermind Paul Le Roux told the judge that upon his release he plans to "start a business selling and hosting bitcoin miners," ... read more.
The number of so-called whales with 1,000 bitcoin or more in their wallets has climbed to 1,882 from around 1,650 in January. It is the highest the numbers have reached in nearly three years. Whales may be defined as the ... read more.
During the last three months, the U.S. Federal Reserve has created a system of monetary avarice, as the central bank can literally do whatever it wants with zero oversight. The American public recently witnessed the Fed’s announcement on Monday, which ... read more.
There has been some confusion over whether India will ban cryptocurrency, including bitcoin, following recent reports of a note being circulated by the government. News.Bitcoin.com interviewed executives of five cryptocurrency exchange platforms in India to find out the truth about ... read more.
The chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) has called on other regulators to establish a framework for sound crypto regulation. He believes that the U.S. must lead in the crypto field and "applying overly prescriptive rules could stunt ... read more.
In his testimony before the Senate banking committee, Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell warned Congress that the U.S. federal budget has been on an unsustainable path for years. He added that the U.S. economy is facing a deep downturn with ... read more.
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has won a case in which it demanded that a Maryland couple liquidate their bitcoin to pay-off a $1.1 million tax debt. Alexander and Laura Strashny proposed to the IRS to pay their 2017 tax ... read more.
It’s been approximately 37 days since the notorious Bitcoin reward halving that took place on Monday, May 11, 2020. On June 16, the Bitcoin network saw a large upwards difficulty adjustment making it much harder to mine bitcoins and slowing ... read more.
Wisdomtree has filed for a commodity fund with 5% exposure to bitcoin, in a fresh attempt to bring an exchange-traded fund (ETF) backed by the benchmark cryptocurrency to the market. According to a filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange ... read more.
Former national security advisor John Bolton has reportedly revealed in his upcoming book an instruction about bitcoin that President Donald Trump gave to Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin. The U.S. Justice Department has filed a lawsuit against Bolton to stop the ... read more.
The popular and first Singapore-based carpooling platform, Ryde has revealed that customers will soon be able to pay with bitcoin. The feature will be available after the bitcoin support is incorporated into the company's payment app on June 22. Ryde ... read more.
Stephen Roach, former chief economist at Morgan Stanley, has predicted that a dollar crash is coming, forecasting a 35% drop in the dollar's value against other major currencies. He expects the U.S. national savings rate to sink deeper into negative ... read more.
Analysts Say Bitcoin Breakout Imminent: Silver-like Suppression, $5 Trillion in Cash Could Flow Into BTC
A number of venture capitalists and macro investors believe bitcoin's price will break out soon following suit with gold’s recent climactic rise. Dan Tapeiro, cofounder of Gold Bullion International, thinks that $4.6 trillion in cash sitting on the sidelines right ... read more.
Crypto Card Issuer Wirecard Missing $2.1 Billion Cash, Company Shares Plunge 62%
About 1.9 billion euros ($2.13 billion) worth of cash is missing from one of Wirecard's trust accounts and the crypto debit card provider cannot as yet account for the money, the company reported on Thursday. In a statement, the major ... read more.
The premier cryptocurrency gaming portal, Bitcoin Games has announced the launch of a Midsummer promotion that promises Free Spins and loads of entertainment. For well over, five years now Bitcoin Games has been the go-to destination for all your gaming ... read more.
Robust and effective compliance programs for virtual asset exchanges such as Bitcoin of America, which owns and operates a crypto exchange platform as well as a nationwide network of bitcoin ATM locations, isn’t simply a matter of operating a system ... read more.
Whale alert reports that a so-called whale has transferred the equivalent of $2.24 billion in bitcoin for less than $7. In a series of tweets on Friday, the crypto tracking tool said the bitcoin (BTC) whale sent a total of ... read more.
Bitcoin.com Exchange is thrilled to announce the upcoming listing of a new digital asset on the 20th of August 2020 at 10:00 UTC. BUY by Burency is a new cryptocurrency that aims to increase cryptocurrency and blockchain adoption in the ... read more.
Bitcoin's Rise Driven by Institutional Trading, Says Research and Investor Sentiment
The cryptocurrency bitcoin is trading at an all-time high relative to its social activity, explains the crypto research firm Tie. The analysts at Tie believe the ratio indicates that bitcoin is being driven by institutional trading. Meanwhile, statistics from Google ... read more.
Ernst & Young (EY) has introduced a new application that helps U.S. cryptocurrency traders calculate and file their taxes with ease. The EY Cryptoprep app, a Software as a Service (SaaS) web-based crypto tax engine, helps users calculate crypto-related gains ... read more.
Akon City, a "futuristic cryptocurrency themed city" founded by famous singer Akon, is ready to begin construction, with a plan to use the akoin cryptocurrency exclusively. Phase one of Akon City's construction will include roads, a hospital, a mall, hotels, ... read more.
Bitcoin Cash proponents have been introduced to a new project built using the Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) framework called mistcoin (MIST). The new token is essentially the first mineable implementation of colored coins on Bitcoin Cash. Mist allows participants to ... read more.
On June 19, 2020, the massive industrial firm Honeywell told the public the company is now running a quantum computer that effectively leverages six effective quantum bits, or qubits. Honeywell’s machine is two times more powerful than the quantum computers ... read more.
Wirecard chief executive officer quit as the crypto card payments firm revealed that the €1.9 billion ($2.1 billion) missing from its accounts may not exist. CEO Markus Braun resigned on June 19, after nearly 20 years at the helm. James ... read more.
Police in New Zealand confiscated NZ$140 million ($91 million) from Russian bitcoin exchange operator Alexander Vinnik. Vinnik is the alleged owner of the collapsed BTC-e exchange. The funds were seized from bank accounts held by Canton Business Corporation, a New ... read more.
Decrypted, a new crypto movie about Satoshi Nakamoto, the mysterious creator of Bitcoin, is in production. In this "outrageous and provocative dark comedy," Satoshi Nakamoto is kidnapped by the NSA and tortured for information that could help the government destroy ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Chairman Jay Clayton is geared to leave the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) after President Donald Trump nominates him to serve as the next U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York. With his departure, the cryptocurrency industry ... read more.
'Elon Musk' bitcoin giveaways continue to scam people on Youtube. Scammers have reportedly pulled in millions of dollars in bitcoin from people wanting to double their cryptocurrency. Some of them use bitcoin addresses containing the name Elon Musk, Spacex, or ... read more.
Only 3.5 Million Bitcoin Is Traded Worldwide; Majority of BTC Held Long-Term as Digital Gold
Only 3.5 million bitcoin or 19% of total circulating supply is actively traded throughout the world, while the rest is being held long-term by investors, according to a new report by crypto analytics company Chainalysis. Per the report, nearly 18.6 ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
Libertyx has expanded its network to include 20,000 7-Eleven, CVS, and Rite Aid Pharmacy stores where customers can buy bitcoin with cash. They can also buy bitcoin using debit cards at one of Libertyx's vast network of ATMs, bringing the ... read more.
Jim Rogers, who cofounded the Quantum Fund with billionaire investor George Soros, has shared his view on bitcoin, its use as money, and governments' response to the growing use of cryptocurrency. He predicts that central banks will not let uncontrolled ... read more.
This week digital currency enthusiasts have been discussing network fees, specifically transaction fees associated with the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains. Last Sunday on June 21, one Ethereum proponent noted that during the last 16 days, Ethereum users have paid more ... read more.
Simple Ledger Protocol Universe Is Thriving: Lottery, Mint, ATMs, Over 8,500 SLP Tokens Created
It’s been close to twelve months since we reported on the vast Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) universe built on top of the Bitcoin Cash chain. At the time, there were 2,700 unique SLP tokens created, and that’s increased by 217% ... read more.
