Not in sufficient numbers. AI needs as much training data as possible.
Is this the same government that, through ZEC, denied the opposition the voter’s roll, citing issues of “security”? They trust the Chinese government more than Zimbabwean citizens? What progress can ever come from such twisted myopic logic?
Do you know the real reason that why China needs these data?
You only talked and worried about the data exporting result but never explained the reason behind it. Of course it’s not right that Zimbabwe government didn’t consult the public before sending the face data to China(if it’s truth), but China needs these data for a reason. There are nearly half a million Africans living in Guangzhou of China, including lots of Zimbabwean, however, quit a lot of them are becoming criminals. They rob, rape, steal and even traffic in narcoties in China. Frankly to say, they are gangsters and mobs. That’s why China’s law enforcement agency needs the data to develop AI models to fight against these illegal African criminals. Trust me, we don’t have any interests in collecting African face data.
It is customary to exagerate the threat posed by foreign nationals. No one is doubting the value of the system when it comes to fighting crime. It would be naive to think that this will be the primary purpose of the system. China and it’s African friends have a healthy fear of “dissidents” . The number of Africans living in China is so small even if they are criminals among them it can be easily policed using normal methods. This is about creating an AI that can be sold to revolutionary parties so they can keep their grip on power. It is reprehensible that all is this being achieved by needlessly violating our rights
Oh my gosh! This is the first time I’ve seen the (in)famous 50 cent Army in action so close to home! Do you guys really get 50c? Is 50 Cent your foreign liaison? Your english is excellent too. Do you get special language training in-house or did you get recruited because of your proficiency? How come you’re on this side of the net? Are you part of an African web task force? Is there an actual African web task force?? Wait wait wait! Can you literally see how well you convinced me to suck it coz Africans are looting and raping in China??? I don’t know man, I think your 50c would have been better spent on deflecting the Uyghur suppression and elimination issue than telling me to be cool with you exporting your tools of repression to target me in my own nation.
