When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to go to the desired page. Touch device users, explore by touch or with swipe gestures.
The currency will be distributed to users for free.
Get daily crypto briefings and weekly Bitcoin market reports delivered right to your inbox.
Look up “hyperinflation” in the dictionary, and you’ll probably find a picture of Zimbabwe’s 100 trillion dollar bill. The country has become an unfortunate poster for economic mismanagement, but one project, Zimbocash, is seeking to heal Zimbabwe’s economic woes with a token on the TRON blockchain.
Zimbocash is not the only cryptocurrency attempting to make inroads to Zimbabwe – Bitcoin has also made something of a comeback, and Dash has probed the market through a partnership with Kuvacash .
However, economic conditions in Zimbabwe make it difficult to convert fiat to crypto at a large scale. Most Zimbabweans do not have a lot of cash on hand, making it difficult to acquire any amount of the cryptocurrency.
Zimbabweans don’t have to spend money to hodl Zimbocash. In order to make the new currency viable, anyone can acquire it through a simple registration process.
The program is free for Zimbabwe residents, with 25,000 ZIMBOCASH for signing up and further allocations for signing up others. These free allocations diminish over time, much like cryptocurrency mining rewards. Once the allocation phase is complete, the founders hope to get listed on an international exchange, allowing for free market price discovery.
It’s not a foolproof allocation process, and cynics might remark on the similarities with Initiative Q. But co-founder Philip Haslam is confident that Zimbocash could germinate into a successful payments network. The South African-born economist also serves as Zimbocash’s head of communications.
“Zimbocash will look like any normal online bank account or Ecocash wallet – you will be able to log in, see your balance and send Zimbocash to others when doing trading,” Haslam explained.
With this approach, once enough users use and own the currency, the network effect can take over. “People have nothing to lose by signing up,” Haslam added. “the power of this is in the community of people who create this currency together.”
The Zimbocash team is making a concerted effort to get more users on-board, visiting towns and cities throughout the country and hosting workshops in September. At present, they have over 11,000 sign-ups.
“Time is of the essence,” the team says, with allocations of Zimbocash to registrants halving after September 30. Allocations will continue to halve every three months.
Haslam hopes that decentralization can help solve Zimbabwe’s severe money and banking problems. With blockchain technology, Zimbocash will be the basis of “a fixed money system,” preventing anyone from printing more of the currency once it is launched.
It will also be free of centralized restrictions, Haslam noted, saying it will be “practically impossible for anyone to shut down, seize people’s money or stop cross-border flows.”
The next step is to establish a token on the TRON blockchain. The team says it is in discussion with “some of the largest cryptocurrency exchanges in the world” to host an Initial Exchange Offering.
A Zimbocash IEO would allow international buyers to help set the prices, with ten percent of the token supply to be sold. Following this period of price discovery, Zimbabweans would be able to sell their TRON-based Zimbocash for cryptocurrencies or fiat currencies, “once they have made the mandatory six transfers to other people on the exchange.”
The minimum transfer requirement enables the establishment of Zimbocash as a transactional currency, “using the latest price as a reference,” Haslam explains.
After that, the team hopes for adoption to grow organically through network effects. The end goal is to establish a system in which Zimbabweans use the currency to pay for goods and services.
It might seem like a long shot, but “considering Zimbabwe’s current economic crisis,” Haslam explains, “we need to do it.”
The team has also paid close attention to issues of regulation and government involvement. While cryptocurrencies are not currently governed under the country’s regulations, Zimbocash has been in discussions with legal advisors and individuals in the government about their proposed solution.
“We are absolutely committed to working with the government and we want them to be involved,” Haslam emphasized. “In fact, we are allocating 10% of the tokens to the Zimbabwe government and are making one third of the transaction fees available for building Zimbabwe.”
Laswet Savadye, head of the Zimbocash Ambassador team, is spearheading a nationwide education campaign to spread awareness and recruit future users. “Zimbabweans must be able to trust the money and the banks that they use,” he explained. “We want to see the economy of Zimbabwe transformed with sound money built on blockchain technology.”
If you happen to live in Zimbabwe and want to get some free tokens, you can learn more on the Zimbocash website .
The information on or accessed through this website is obtained from independent sources we believe to be accurate and reliable, but Decentral Media, Inc. makes no representation or warranty as to the timeliness, completeness, or accuracy of any information on or accessed through this website. Decentral Media, Inc. is not an investment advisor. We do not give personalized investment advice or other financial advice. The information on this website is subject to change without notice. Some or all of the information on this website may become outdated, or it may be or become incomplete or inaccurate. We may, but are not obligated to, update any outdated, incomplete, or inaccurate information.
You should never make an investment decision on an ICO, IEO, or other investment based on the information on this website, and you should never interpret or otherwise rely on any of the information on this website as investment advice. We strongly recommend that you consult a licensed investment advisor or other qualified financial professional if you are seeking investment advice on an ICO, IEO, or other investment. We do not accept compensation in any form for analyzing or reporting on any ICO, IEO, cryptocurrency, currency, tokenized sales, securities, or commodities.
